[Music]
this Sunday reopening America Americans
are looking forward to the safe and
rapid reopening of our country
president Trump ending the social
distancing guideline they'll be fading
out because now the governors are doing
Americans desperate to get back to work
nobody's made any money for two months
so they need to get in here and make
money but many are urging caution and
hopefully everyone does it according to
the guidelines for opening America again
when we take a step forward we don't
want to take two steps back my guest
this morning dr. Tom Ingoldsby of Johns
Hopkins University and health directors
from two states taking different
approaches to reopen plus new hope for a
Cova 19 treatment the data shows that
Brenda Sofia has a clear-cut significant
positive effect in diminishing the time
to recovery how long until we have a
treatment or a vaccine
I'll talk to Sir John Bell from Oxford
University where a promising vaccine
study is well underway also declaring
victory I think when you ask how did we
do I think we did a spectacular job with
more than 60,000 dead and 30 million out
of work is the Trump administration
risking its own mission accomplished
moments and pull vault Joe Biden takes
the lead in battleground states but now
calls are growing for a fuller
investigation of charges by his accuser
tari joining me for insight and analysis
are NBC News Capitol Hill correspondent
Casey Hutt former congressional budget
director Douglas holtz-eakin infectious
disease physician dr. Naheed Medallia
and Amy Walter national editor for the
cook Political Report welcome to Sunday
it's Meet the Press and our continuing
coverage of the corona virus pandemic
from NBC News in watch
the longest-running show in television
history this is Meet the Press with
Chuck Todd
good Sunday morning it was on January
6th at the CDC first issue to travel
notice for one China consider what has
happened in less than four months time
more than 1.1 million confirmed cases of
kovat 19 have been diagnosed in the US
and more than 66,000 Americans have died
the American economy shrunk by nearly 5
percent in the first quarter with the
worst yet to come and some 30 million
Americans have filed for unemployment
benefits just in the past six weeks
those are the sobering numbers but this
has not been like other crises think
9/11 Oklahoma City even the Challenger
accident instead of being united in
grief much of America is divided by
politics we see it in the anti social
distancing protests and states extending
stay-at-home guidelines we see it in a
Gallup poll that finds 44% of
Republicans would be willing to return
to normal activities right now if there
were no restrictions at all while only
four percent of Democrats say the exact
same thing we see an advice president
Pence not wearing a face mask at the
Mayo Clinic where it's the rule we can
even see it in the Wall Street Journal
report that the Trump campaign has
ordered red Trump branded face masks for
supporters it all prompted this
statement yesterday from former
president george w bush in the final
analysis we are not partisan combatants
we are human beings equally vulnerable
and equally wonderful in the sight of
god of course there have been countless
acts of kindness generosity and heroism
especially from our health care workers
but much of that good news is obscured
by the intensifying and often partisan
debate over when and how to reopen this
country the president is pressing States
to end stay-at-home orders and by
tomorrow 33 states will have begun the
process of at least partial reopening
after federal social distancing
guidelines expired on Thursday Mother's
Day is coming up your mama told you to
wash your hands and cover your nose and
mouth if you call for as long as we do
those simple things and use common sense
we ought to be just fine they did
misleading pictures acting like you know
this was like Lollapalooza on the beach
or something like that
has there been some type of major
outbreak no but in Michigan where armed
demonstrators stormed the Capitol this
week swastikas and Confederate flags
nooses and automatic rifles do not
represent who we are as Michiganders
nothing that I want more than to just
flip a switch and return to normal but
that's not how it's going to work
unfortunately
on Tuesday the president promised to
meet the testing benchmark set by a
Harvard study are you saying you're
confident you can surpass 5 million
tests per day is that well we're gonna
be there very soon on Wednesday he
walked that back I didn't say it but
somebody came out with a report saying 5
million I think that was from the
Harvard report but we are going to be
there at a certain point even so the
president has political aides are trying
to recast the federal response to the
pandemic as a success story we did all
the right moves I think we did a
spectacular job we have saved thousands
and thousands of lives I can even make
that if you want hundreds of thousands
of lives the government federal
government rose to the challenge and
this is a great success story the
language is nothing new for months as
the death toll is risen the president
has declared in some form or another
mission accomplished when you have 15
people and the 15 within a couple of
days is going to be down to close to
zero that's a pretty good job we've done
so we near the end of our historic
battle with the invisible enemy we can
begin the next front in our war which
we're calling opening up America again
back in late February you predicted that
the number of cases would go down to
zero how did we get from your prediction
of zero to 1 million well it will go
down to zero ultimately presidents own
public health experts warn against
reopening too quickly
you can't just leap over things and get
into a situation where you're really
tempting a rebound but perhaps motivated
by the political calendar the White
House is presenting a rosier timeline
early summer we could be in a much
better place as a nation May is the
transition month May and June probably
by June a lot of the country should be
back to normal and joining me now is
dr. tom ingoldsby he's the director at
the Center for health security of the
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public
Health dr. Inglesby welcome to Meet the
Press and let me just start with a
simple question 33 states are doing this
we had we noted that 18 states have hit
their one-day case total high of those
33 in the last two weeks
so technically not meeting those phase 1
metrics are we ready to be doing this as
a country I think we need to be going
forward very cautiously I think if you
look at the overall country numbers were
about 200,000 new cases a week at this
point and in the last month we've had
something on the order of 60,000 deaths
so most of the illness and death has
occurred over the last 30 days
so overall as a country we still have a
long way to go but the states are in
very different places and some states a
small minority of states are beginning
to to get closer to the White House
metrics of two weeks decline and so in
those places if they have other
capabilities in place if they're able to
really rapidly isolate and trace the
contacts of patients with kovat if
they're able to diagnose very widely
everybody who's got symptoms of kovat
not just the sick people but everybody
then those states would be the places
where would be least risky to go ahead
and begin to reopen are we or do we not
have the testing capacity right now to
give the states the met the security
they have of making these decisions how
much is this somewhat guesswork because
of our test our lack of surveillance
capabilities when it comes to where the
virus is and many of these places yeah I
think there still is a lot of
uncertainty you but there is a range of
diagnostic testing capability across the
country and and you can tell that in the
percent of persons who are who are
positive in some states they're testing
so so many people that the percent of
people who are positive is very low and
that's a good number in other places a
percent of people testing is very high
and
that's worrisome so it depends on where
you are in the country in terms of
access to testing the operations around
testing it's like a patchwork across the
country is there a way when were you
gonna know whether this is a mistake or
not is it basically waiting the next two
to four weeks and these incubation
periods yeah for this disease it's going
to take about two weeks two to three
weeks for us to begin to see trends that
come out of the changes in social
distancing so measure taken this morning
you probably won't see a change in
hospitalization rates where ICU capacity
until two or three weeks from now so
that's the nature of the disease it's
going to take a little time for things
to get into the system what is something
that these state health officials don't
have access to data wise that you wish
they did before making these decisions I
think we should in in a in the coming
weeks and months we need to get a much
better handle on the number of mild and
moderate cases of disease that we have
the good news is that many many people
do not get seriously ill with this
disease but the bad news is that we're
not capturing those people in terms of
numbers for the country and if we don't
know who they are then we can't break
their chains of transmission we can't
isolate them we can't quarantine their
contacts so we need to know much more
about the mild and moderate illnesses
around the country and that will come
with more diagnostic testing I want to
ask you something that somebody wrote
about the CDC it was I think a colleague
of yours at Johns Hopkins oh no excuse
me dr. jaha's at Harvard but it was sort
of the odd lacking of missing data that
the CDC normally tracks he said normally
you know if you wanted to find out how
many people had tuberculosis in this
country in the last year asked the CDC
we want to know about health
care-associated infections ask the CDC
but ask how many Cova 19 tests have been
done and the CDC doesn't have an answer
on a daily update and how many people
are getting hospitalized for Koba 19 the
CDC isn't tracking it want to know if
social distancing is
making a difference the CDC doesn't know
what is going on here are we missing a
huge component of our public health
response I think we do need more data
clearly I certainly agree with the the
need for the data that dr. JA outlined
there I think that we're tracking this
epidemic in a different way than we've
tracked others we haven't had this
urgent need to understand
hospitalizations on a day-to-day
week-to-week basis as we've had for some
of the other things we've confronted
before and we need to get better as a
country we need to we need to get our
like if you look at State Health
Department data right now some states
are not reporting their hospitalization
data we live in a federal system if
they're not reporting at the state level
it's hard for CDC to get that data in
real-time so I think we all need to
collectively get better some states have
more data available than others but we
should all be rising let's get a
realistic timeline next three months
next six months a lot of people are
concerned about the fall how concerned
are you and as is there any way of Nut
of avoiding a bad fall outcome at this
point without either advancements in a
treatment or a vaccine well before we
even get to the fall I am worried that
we will have small waves in various
places around the country for the coming
months hopefully we won't but as we
begin to ease social distancing in
various places in the country this virus
is highly transmissible that nothing has
changed in the underlying dynamics of
this virus if we stop social distancing
altogether tomorrow we would recreate
the conditions that existed in the
country in february/march so what we
need to do is continue to our best
possible effort all the individual
efforts we're making around social
distancing staying six feet apart
wearing masks went in public avoiding
large gatherings but the extent to which
we're able to do that over the next
couple of months will dictate how we do
as States and as a country ultimately in
the fall we have an additional challenge
we have influenza that will reappear the
flu season will start and at that point
kovat will be mixed with flu and will
be contributing to hospitalizations and
ICU beds and so we're gonna have two
concurrent large public health
challenges at the same time so I am
worried about the uptake and
hospitalization rate and the more people
needing intensive care in the fall but
I'm still I am I don't think people
should think that there will be a lull
that just because the summers coming
we're gonna have a lull before the fall
we'd be wonderful if that happens but I
don't think we should at all assume that
at this point given the nature of this
virus and I'm gonna leave it there
because I think that's a single most
important takeaway viewers need to have
don't call it a law it is unlikely we're
gonna have a lull in the summer anyway
dr. ingly from Johns Hopkins University
thanks for starting us off with your
expertise on this much appreciate it
thanks for having me Chuck and joining
me now are two state officials central
to making decisions about whether when
and again their state should reopen I'm
dr. Scott Harris he's the state health
officer for the Alabama Department of
Public Health and dr. janae called him
chief deputy director for health for the
Michigan Department of Health and Human
Services thank you both for joining and
so I want to start with you dr. Harris
since Alabama's doing a little more
opening right now than Michigan although
you're compared to some of your southern
neighbors I would argue you guys are
being a bit more cautious than others
but tell me the metrics you used that
gave you in the the confidence to advise
the governor at beginning some phase
denry openings sure so we have followed
a number of metrics like I think most
states have including the white house
plan for reopening the gating criteria
that I'm sure you've talked about many
times on this show we're certainly part
of the things that we consider we have
not fully satisfied all of those gaining
criteria in terms of cases per day but
we felt very good about our syndromic
surveillance numbers we vote very good
about our hospital capacity and so when
our governor chose to do was to make a
very measured step a very gradual
reopening of certain types of businesses
the we did not proceed to a full phase
one reopening
like was in the white house plan things
like entertainment venues and gyms and
in in-person dining we have not chosen
to do that so far but we think this is
just a gradual first step what data are
you missing dr. Harris that you wish you
had but you just whether its capacity or
other reasons you don't have yeah there
are a number of things there I think
clearly we would like to make sure we're
testing to the to the level that we
would like um we probably have a total
amount of laboratory bench capacity to
do the number of tests that we would
like to do but that those tests are
really unevenly distributed throughout
the state if you're in a bigger more
urbanized part of our state like
Jefferson County where Birmingham and
located or Madison County and where
Huntsville located so you can probably
have really good access the testing
whenever you like but in some of our
more rural parts of the state we are
able to get testing done but they're
definitely barriers there for people to
obtain that particularly if they have to
find transportation or they don't have
ready access to a healthcare provider
and we've also been surprised to find
that we have not necessarily gotten
negative test results reported to us
it's hard to come up with a good
denominator so that we know the percent
positive tests we have um and and so it
we have reached out to all the labs who
report to the to us but named they
operate out of state and it's just
difficult to get all that information
dr. Calhoun let me ask the question sort
of a slightly different what are you
seeing in your state that makes you
uncomfortable advising the governor to
begin even a partial phase one reopening
yeah so here in the state of Michigan we
have over forty three thousand cases and
over four thousand deaths and so we are
actually third in the country when it
comes to states in the number of deaths
while we've seen certainly significant
improvements over the past several weeks
our hospitals were over capacity
particularly in the southeast area of
the state several weeks ago we are still
having parts of the state that are
seeing an increase in the rate of rise
of cases and we know that their hospital
capacity is not what it should be
we have to get our testing up as I know
people across the country are working on
so while we are cautiously optimistic we
still think we need to be very careful
all right
but dr. cauldron what do you say to
those in the state are going you know
what yes southeast Michigan is being hit
hard are you not comfortable having sort
of a let's isolate parts of the state
tougher stay at home measures for
Southeast Michigan let's loosen things
up in more rural parts of the state why
are you not there yet so we actually
look at this data on a daily basis
regionally and so again we are still
seeing for example on the western side
of the state that there are actually
increases in the rate of rise of cases
we have several outbreaks there we also
know again in some of our rural areas
the number of hospital beds is actually
not what it should be if many of our
hospitals and our rural areas are
actually at capacity so every part of
the state is different even in southeast
quite frankly even though we're seeing a
decrease in the rate of rise we are
still seeing many many cases and many
deaths every day so we're gonna be
working on loosening or dialing up as
far as how reopening the economy the
governor has actually already started
that but we really have to do it in a
incremental data-driven approach
I got imagined both of you are feeling
pressure whether it's pressure from
friends and family tired of the
quarantine pressure from friends of
yours who maybe run businesses or
full-on political pressure doctor called
in let me start with you how have you
handled it and if you've been getting
have you handled the public blowback and
how do you strike that balance in your
own head where you feel like you're
giving full on medical advice versus let
me give you the best medical advice I
can for the policy you want to implement
so you know this is certainly not
personal people hire me to give medical
and public health advices that is what I
do I talked to the governor and and and
other folks in the governor's office on
a regular basis to tell them the facts
these are the number of tests that we
are currently doing this is where we
want to be this is what's going on with
our hospitals and again if we don't do
well with these social distancing
measures more people will die and that
is just the facts
dr. Harris how've you how much have you
felt that pressure I mean obviously it's
significant as you know I mean there are
you know many Alabamians that just don't
have the option of making a living you
know under certain health orders we have
to find the way to strike the right
balance they all right I think our
governor Governor Ivy has done a great
job of trying to balance the health of
the economy with the health of every
talib ambiens my job in public health is
to give her the best health information
I can we present the data on time just
as dr. Calhoun said on how many cases we
have and what our deaths look like um I
think Alabama has been a little bit
different you know every every state is
different and there's you know 51
different plans for reopening I guess
because we're all trying to look at the
data and make our own decisions you know
with the best information that we have
about how to proceed but but there there
are people who are certainly want to
maintain their livelihoods they want to
maintain their businesses and we have to
balance that with with keeping everyone
safe and healthy as much as possible dr.
Harris are you concerned that Georgia
has been more aggressive and you know
for instance Senator Doug Jones in
Alabama has encouraged Alabamians to be
careful traveling to Georgia well it's
obviously we look at that very closely
you know there's certainly some good
aspects about having you know every
state having its own plan because every
state is a little bit different but but
clearly you know all states affect the
others and so we're watching that very
carefully you know what we've done in
Alabama I think is again have the sort
of measured approach and that I think
what I've heard many states say and what
our governor has certainly said is that
these aren't steps forward that are just
gonna ratchet forward and can never come
back you know these are gradual steps
and and we certainly you know will
consider dialing things back if we see
in increasing cases and so I think
that's the approach to probably all
states would want to take we see where
we are after changes are made and then
make changes necessary dr. Calhoun in
Michigan dr. Harris and Alabama thank
you both for sharing your expertise in
the sort of the regional observations
that you both are
both can share with the country good
luck stay healthy out there when we come
back the race for a corona virus vaccine
I'm going to talk to a professor of
medicine at Oxford University in the UK
where they've gotten a head start in
testing a vaccine that they believe is
showing real promise that is nice
[Music]
welcome back the race for a corona virus
vaccine is on and nowhere is there more
optimism or perhaps progress than at
Oxford University they're testing a
vaccine that has shown success in rhesus
monkeys what's more they're ahead of
competitors because earlier testing of
the vaccine for other viruses has shown
it to be safe in people so human testing
can begin much sooner and joining me now
is Sir John Bell he's the Regius
professor of medicine at Oxford
University and he's gonna tell us more
about this welcome to Meet the Press sir
Bell let me just start with this
question one of your colleagues use the
percentage of 80% chance that this
vaccine is at least somewhat successful
in in the next year
are you that optimistic and are you at
all concerned our optimism around the
world for what you guys are doing has
gotten a bit over exuberant yeah so I
obviously people who have dedicated
their careers to this kind of a problem
have a tendency to get excited about the
prospects because the prospects are
pretty good I I certainly wouldn't put
the possibility at 80% that's a pretty
big number but we're gradually reeling
it in bit by bit and as every day goes
by the likelihood of success goes up
you're in the midst of you want to start
some human trials
one of your potential hurdles is the
lack of outbreaks right in order to do
this you need to try your next stead of
trials where do you have you do you know
when you're going to be able to do this
and and where are you looking are you
looking at places like India where are
you looking to do these trials so so
we've still got lots of disease in the
UK we we probably have something in the
order of 15 or 20,000 transmissions a
day in the UK so there's no shortage of
disease here and we'll push we've
already started clinic
so we've already in given the vaccine to
about a thousand people and we're gonna
grow that pretty rapidly we've
consolidated the phase one and two
programs because we are pretty confident
that the vector itself is safe because
it's been used in about 5,000 people
already up to now so that's allowed us
to really accelerate the Phase one
program and we hope that there would be
enough disease that we would get
evidence that the vaccine has efficacy
by the beginning of June
what's the likelihood that if this fails
as a vaccine there will be something
that is usable as a therapeutic and I'm
just wondering and then in the reverse
as you we hear good news about for
instance REM dis aveer on its ability as
a therapeutic how helpful is that in the
development of the vaccine so probably
it's helpful for sure it's probably not
helpful in the development of the
vaccine I don't think it really it works
by a completely different mechanism it
works on the Gotcha
the RNA dependent RNA polymerase which
is a completely different replication
mechanism in the virus so we're we're
stimulating the immune response to the
virus which is at the other end of the
therapeutic options that we've got so
the two are probably not connected but
both could be helpful steps to trying to
get the virus under control there's been
some concern that you guys are going too
fast that and it's not just you it's all
of the all of the the labs that are
attempting to get a vaccine that there's
such pressure coming from national
governments that some safety protocols
will be overlooked I'm sure your you
like others are claiming you're meeting
all those protocols but there has to be
some concern that the pressure is going
to create gaps on this what are you
doing to try to prevent that yeah so so
you're absolutely right it's a big
issue for us is trying to be sure that
we do this quickly but we don't miss out
any of the keys safety steps I think
we've got reason to believe that the
efficacy the efficacy of the vaccine in
terms of generating strong antibody
responses is probably going to be okay
the real question is whether the safety
profile is going to be fine so that's
actually the main focus of the clinical
studies we did all the preclinical work
you would expect anybody to do and in
fact although some companies have left
out for example primate studies they
haven't done as many preclinical study
says we have we did all of them we did
Mouse ferret primate we wanted to get a
good read on what's going on and now
we're being very careful in the clinic
to try and monitor exactly what's
happening but you know that doesn't mean
there won't be safety signals because
there may well be and will be on the
awareness to see if we can see when is
the next time you will find out if if
this is not going to work you know
there's these different moments well
you'll find out oh we can go to a next
step when will you know if this isn't
going to be a successful vaccine effort
yeah so I think there'll be primary data
released this week that'll be an
important milestone and then we'll have
to wait until there's enough incident
disease in the Phase two cohort which
has been vaccinated now to see whether
we have largely eliminated the disease
in those vaccinated with this vaccine as
opposed to the placebo and that's really
the test and that's what we'll probably
get a signal based on current levels of
the disease we'll probably get a signal
in early June we're ready to move trials
overseas if the disease Peters out in
the UK so we've got sites already in
play in other bits of the world where
it's active so we're pretty sure we'll
get a signal by June about whether this
works enough and finally do you have a
sense of this will be a one-time vaccine
or something closer to the flu where
perhaps we have to have it
different vaccine due to a mutation
every year yeah so so coronavirus
doesn't mutate at the pace of flu as far
as we can see but it it's also quite a
tricky virus in terms of generating
long-standing and Noonie responses to it
and i as a result i suspect we may need
to have relatively regular vaccinations
against corona viruses going into the
future that that of course remains to be
seen but that's my bed at the moment is
that this is likely to be a seasonal
corona virus vaccine sir john bell at
oxford a whole world room for you thanks
for going to the movies with us thank
you very much thank you
when we come back finding a vaccine is
one thing fixing our economy is another
gargantuan challenge the panel is next
and as we go to break look up in the sky
it's the Navy's Blue Angels and the Air
Force's Thunderbird flying around the
country and honor the nation
[Music]
welcome back the panel is with us from
their remote locations NBC News Capitol
Hill correspondent KC hunt
former congressional budget director and
current president of the American action
forum Douglas holtz-eakin an infectious
disease physician dr. nahin Battaglia
from Boston University Doug I want to
start with you because we've done a lot
on the vaccine we've done a lot on the
reopening on the health aspect of things
but let's talk about the economy just
give us your big-picture sense when you
hear about 2008 you hear about the Great
Depression how would you describe where
we're at right now and where you think
were realistically headed well Chuck
we've had some horrific economic data we
saw the largest one-month decline and
consumer confidence the largest
one-month decline in consumer spending
we've had 30 million people apply for
unemployment insurance in the past six
weeks I think it's fair to expect that
over the months of April May and June
will see national income decline by 10
percent the worst year in the Great
Depression was 12% we're going to
experience that this spring do you think
Doug I want to stick with you minute
do you think that the ideas that have
been percolating in Congress left and
right in general have been meeting the
moment or do you feel as if in some ways
members of Congress haven't fully
grasped how big and how gargantuan this
is I think Congress deserves credit for
moving quickly moving dramatically if
you think about what's going on we're
losing 10 percent of national income the
so-called cares Act borrowed 10 percent
of national income and is trying to
distribute it to Americans in the form
of unemployment insurance loans to
businesses grants to businesses checks
that's however just a band-aid the real
work has to be to get the economy to
stop falling we cannot do that
continuously so we're gonna have to get
the economy moving again and there
you're at this tough intersection of the
public health mission which has got to
be the primary objective is also the
most important economic ball
right and dr. Bedell yeah I think this
is the the challenge that I feel like
you in the public health community and
puttan and health officials in general
there is life and livelihood and that
balance and and what do you fear from
that the pressure public health
officials are gonna be feeling about
reopening the economy what do you fear
that's going to lead to well Chuck you
heard Tom angles we talked about the
fact that the conditions haven't changed
from when we put the lockdown into place
which means reopening as this balance of
you know restarting economy against
acceptance of the risk that we will get
more infections and of course one of
those infections will result in
hospitalizations and deaths when you
look at the preparedness of the states
it's kind of a patchwork right so the
capacity the core capacities in terms of
testing doctor angles we've mentioned
the fact about this idea of how many
people you test and w-h-o says that if
you are testing to a point where more
than 10% of the people you're testing
are still coming back positive you're
not testing enough now that the 33
states 12 of them have rates above 10%
when you look at ICU capacity of those
33 states eight of them have already hit
their head room for ICU capacity and
when you talk about contact tracing
there's a Hopkins study that says that
we need hundred thousand contact tracers
and what an NPR did a study of all the
states 41 states responded and said we
have about seven point six thousand
contact tracers from looking to hire 36
thousand more so we're not there in
terms of capacity or it's a patchwork
where some states are potentially doing
it better than other and so my fear as
it is with a lot of public health
focuses is ensuring that states meet
those capacities before they take the
risk of putting particularly the
vulnerable amongst our communities at at
risk so it's nursing homes prisons yeah
my communities let me ask you the
question this way over the last two
months in the medical community what
have we learned enough and with the news
on room dis aveer how much now how much
how much capacity is that bought us how
much of an ability that we know there is
some best practices that can lessen
the time in the hospital or lesson the
mortality rate how comfortable are you
getting that we're there where that can
allow us to have some more reopening
we're definitely in a better place than
we were you know in some ways so one
part is our testing capacity is better
if you looked at the numbers about a
month ago we were testing ten people you
know eight people to ten people for a
thousand and we're now testing about
eighteen to nineteen so that's better
REM desappear is promising and the fact
that it provides you with the proof of
concept as dr. Fauci has said that there
drugs like it or in itself could help
reduce mortality but we still need a
whole other range of drugs such as we
need medications that if you're exposed
potentially it keeps you from getting
sick
so something called post exposure
prophylaxis and then from what we know
about this disease you know we're
learning that it's basically making the
body attack use it uses the body's
immune system to basically attack itself
the virus wreaks havoc and then the rest
of the stuff that happens to the body is
the attack that you're doing on itself
and large drugs they're still in the
works haven't shown are starting to
social some promise but we don't have a
slam-dunk in helping with that aspect of
disease yet we move to the politics here
Casey hunt we are going to get a sort of
right in front of a split screen the
Senate is coming back the house isn't
the Senate is is saying well look we've
got to tough it out essentially the
house is saying it's not safe
it's the divide we're seeing in America
in some ways between left and right and
Chuck they're even seeing it in who is
deciding to wear masks when they come up
to Capitol Hill and who isn't and you
know this is emerging as the kind of
partisan divide that I think you know if
you listen to the experts like like
those that we've just been talking to
you know if Americans are not all on the
same page about engaging in the public
health protection measures it gets a lot
harder to get to the point where you can
feel confident in reopening that
everybody will remain healthy and the
longer that
this goes on and the sharper those
divisions become the harder the overall
mission is and you know don't forget
every month that goes by we're a month
closer to a presidential election and
that's gonna influence so much of this
conversation as well
I'm curious Casey I was the whole
testing weirdness of the Senate the
president said oh use this quick testing
feature that we've been using at the
White House and then McConnell and
Pelosi decided not to accept it what is
going on there they don't think that
they should be seen having access to
things that regular everyday Americans
don't have access to and in in that way
the imperative is a little different my
question is if they do bring the house
back it's different from the Senate and
that it's 435 people they are scattered
across all corners of this country all
coming back the risk is very high will
those rank-and-file members say this is
something that we need in order to be
able to function Pelosi and McConnell
are relatively old school and they're
thinking about things like this I mean
there was a lot of reluctance in the
beginning to either close tours at the
Capitol and Nancy Pelosi was saying you
know we are the captains of the ship we
are the last to leave at the end of the
day concerns among her members pushed
her to change course on that all right
Douglas holtz-eakin with the economy
Nahid Medallia on health and casey hunt
there in politics thank you all Casey
you stick around for a little more
political talk when we come back how
attitudes about the pandemic have
changed over the last seven weeks
[Music]
welcome back data download time as some
states begin to reopen many Americans
are trying to adapt to this new normal
a survey by data a leading survey
insights company has been asking if
Americans feel that the worst of the
pandemic is behind us or as you have to
come in week one
which was the week starting on March
15th only 7% of registered voters said
the worst of this was behind us by week
four beginning April 5th that number
only rose to just 11% we felt that way
and by week seven beginning on April 26
29 percent four times the original
number did believe the worst of this
virus is behind it now in week 1 more
than a third of Americans said they were
very concerned about their family's
financial stability but by week four
that had actually slipped slightly down
and is now down to 27 percent as states
begin to reopen some businesses but
while Americans are feeling slightly
better about their physical and
financial health they are also
increasingly resigned to the fact that
this is not ending anytime soon on week
1 only a quarter said they expected the
pandemic to last six months or more that
ticked up 11 points by week four and now
we a majority 56 percent believe the
pandemic will last six months or more
which is probably why when asked about a
return to some pre coded 19 activities
many say they'll move it slowly in some
cases very slowly more than 60% of
Americans who fly regularly said this
week that they would wait at least four
months before flying again and 42
percent of regular air travelers said
they would wait even longer 7 months or
more nearly half of those surveyed
remain concerned about their health
overall most Americans seem to agree
that coronavirus is difficult to manage
it's causing pain and it's not going
away anytime soon when we come back
we're going to turn to politics Joe
Biden is denied the allegations made by
tar Reid as he set enough
welcome back Casey hun is still with us
and joining us is Amy Walter national
editor of the cook Political Report
all righty let me play one of the bytes
from Joe Biden's interview on Morning
Joe from Friday here it is would you
please go on the record with the
American people did you sexually assault
Tara Reid no it is not true I'm saying
unequivocally it never never happened it
didn't never happened Amy Walter the New
York Times is not satisfied with the
vice president's answer in fact they
right mr. Biden's word is insufficient
to dispel the cloud and the inventory
should be strictly limited to
information about miss Reed and
conducted by an unbiased apolitical
panel put together by the DNC and chosen
to foster as much trust in its findings
as possible so Amy a Walter how much
appetite is there in the Democratic
Party to do something as extensive as
the New York Times is outlining and
conservatives the idea that the DNC is
going to put together an unbiased panel
to look through the the documents of Joe
Biden is is kind of stretching it look
Chuck where we are in the place where
we've been for so much of these last
couple of years especially in the light
of this me to movement about the fight
not just over who to believe but the
fight over hypocrisy and that's where a
lot of this debate is being centered on
Democrats including Joe Biden but a lot
of Democrats and liberals who held one
standard for folks like Brett Kavanaugh
right and seem to be holding a different
standard for Joe Biden but this Chuck
reminds me a little bit of the battle we
saw in 2016 and quite frankly we still
see today with evangelicals and their
support for Donald Trump right how can
you support this person who's going
against the standards you set for
somebody else and at the end of the day
this is what voters are left with not so
much who they believe or don't believe
but how they battle this cognitive
dissonance and usually partisanship is
what breaks the tie no in Casey on
social media basically it's the
hypocrisy of the defenders of the party
of Bill Clinton and the defenders of the
party of Donald Trump right that that's
what every social media debate devolves
into is some sort of what about ISM on
those two gentlemen well Chuck I think
also to Amy's point Republicans are
focusing on how Brett Kavanaugh was
handled and how the media handled Brett
Kavanaugh how Democrats talked about
Brett Kavanaugh they're not talking
about Donald Trump because the reality
is that they can't because the list of
accusers that this president has is very
long and you know each individual
accusation has a different set of facts
a different set of claims in the case of
Joe Biden there there is one and that
claim is now being explored and they are
having to grapple with it but you're
right that you know this debate has
become very muddled and devolved into
you know lobbying charges back and forth
you know at the end of the day I think
Americans who care deeply about this
issue and who care about women and
harassment and changing that culture at
the end of the day this is going to be a
choice between Joe Biden and Donald
Trump and there are two separate sets of
facts there and you know I'm gonna vote
errs are obviously gonna be able to make
up their own minds about that yeah I
mean Casey I think without without the
piece of paper showing up but I am
curious how many Democrats on Capitol
Hill are empathetic do you think quietly
are quietly empathetic with the call by
the New York Times for some formal
investigation Chuck I don't know that
there's a huge appetite for that I think
you know when you talk about okay it's
shifting the debate into a different
sphere the email question around Hillary
Clinton that's kind of the first memory
that Democrats have and you know I think
behind the scenes the Biden campaign is
very much trying to focus on insisting
they are not gonna get into a situation
where it's but her emails but I do think
you know Democrats want this campaign to
be as clean and straightforward as
possible and to the extent that there
are questions about transparency that's
gonna be a problem for every Democrat
and particularly women Democrats they
have been the ones who have had to
answer questions about this act
Nancy Pelosi has defended Joe Biden
Kirsten Gillibrand as well so the easier
that the Biden campaign can make them in
terms of answering our questions in
hallways I think the happier Democrats
are going to be so as difficult as
perhaps Friday and the weekend has been
for Joe Biden Amy Walter if you just
looked at the polls the last two weeks
in particular I mean whether it's a
battleground state or a quasi
battleground state it seems as if it
doesn't matter if it's a national poll
state poll Biden is ahead or on the move
everywhere I how much of it do you
attribute to just the pandemic and
Donald Trump and how much of this is
democratic rallying around Democrats
riling a bit around Biden yeah it seems
more like the former Chuck that this is
as much about Donald Trump as anything
else I mean what you noticed over this
last couple of weeks is that you know
voters are expecting their political
leaders to meet the moment a lot of
Governors have and you're seeing their
approval ratings up in the 70s in some
cases close to 80% Donald Trump's are
back where they've always been because
he met this moment in the same way he
meets every moment it's polarizing it's
divisive and it's putting people back
into their political camps the one thing
I will note though Chuck is for as as
strong as Joe Biden is looking in those
states and in national polls what you
also see is that President Trump hasn't
created and his overall vote chair if
you look at the matchup between Joe
Biden and Donald Trump doesn't match his
approval rating in a lot of these states
in other words he still has room to grow
in these states there's a group of
people who saying I like the job that
the president's doing I'm not yet quite
ready to say I'm gonna vote for them
it's easy for him it's easier for Trump
to get those people back they haven't
defected at least not yet to Joe Biden
well it's a reminder Amy and it was
something John Reese and the EP and I
talked about yesterday
he's still in his range his trading
range may be at the low end of his
trading range but he's still sitting in
his range and we know what that means
anyway Casey hunt Amy Walter thank you
that's all we have for today thank you
for watching thank you for trusting us
here at NBC
stay safe be well practice social
distancing we'll be back next week
because if it's Sunday it's me
[Music]
more Americans watch NBC News than any
other news organization in the world